Project  3:  Errors  in  Numerical  Integration  of  ODEs
In  class  we  talked  about  various  methods  for  the  numerical  integration  of  ordinary  differential 
equations  (ODEs),  and  took  a  very  careful  look  at  their  error  properties.  Here  you  will  verify 
statements  about  error  sizes  in  these  integrators,  using  a  very  simple  ODE  that  is  easy  to  solve 
analytically.
Consider one of the simplest linear ODEs in existence:
dN
dt = −μN (1)
with initial condition N(t = 0) = N0.
We will start by taking a different approach to error in the Euler method. What if we treated
the results of a numerical integration of this ODE as “data,” and used it to compute μ, the decay
constant? How would that behave with stepsize?
(a) Obtain an analytical solution to Eqn. 1.
(b) Suppose you have integrated the equation from t = 0 to t = T, some later time. How would
you use the results of that integration to calculate the value of μ? (Hint: There are many
possible answers here, but pick the easiest one! You should be able to do it using only two
points — N(T) and N(0).)
(c) Write down the Euler step for solving this ODE — specifically, what should Nt+∆t look like
using the Euler method?
(d) Now write a Python script/function that integrates Eqn. 1, using the Euler method, for
μ = 0.8, N0 = 0.1, a total time of T = 4, and a number of steps M = 25. (So your stepsize
∆t, which I called h in class, will be equal to T/M = 0.16.) Use the output of your script to
calculate μ, using the formula you derived in part (b). Do you get back the μ you put in?
You should find that your estimate of μ doesn’t match what you put in! This is a reflection of
the accuracy issues with the Euler method; μ is wrong because our stepsize is causing our solution to
be inaccurate. For an ODE this simple, we can do a couple more calculations to see this explicitly.
(e) Go back to your difference equation; you should be able to obtain an analytical expression
for NT = NM∆t. (Hint: Start by finding N∆t, the value after a single step, starting at t = 0.
Then do N2∆t, which uses the value you just found for N∆t. Continue until you figure out the
pattern.)
Notice that NM∆t doesn’t look like the analytical solution you found in part (a).
(f) Using the definition of ex as a limit
ex = limn→∞
(
1 + x
n
)n
(2)
show that your difference equation solution converges to the true solution as ∆t → 0 — or
equivalently M → ∞ — for a fixed final time T. (Hint : You may need to play around with
some substitutions using T = M∆t to get the limit expression in the form you need.)
So now you have found that you need to take extremely small time steps in order for the Euler
method to produce an acceptable answer (as I told you was the case in class). What if we shrink
the stepsize a bit?
(g) Use your Python script to take M = 250 steps and measure μ as you did in part (d). Is it
closer to the number you expect?
(h) Now let’s measure the error in Nt as a function of stepsize. Calculate the absolute error εG
using your Euler integration (out to NT ) and the exact solution for N(T) that your found in
(a) for a few (ten at the least!) values of M in the range M = 25 to M = 25000 (corresponding
to smaller and smaller stepsizes). Plot your calculated absolute errors as a function of M (or
∆t = h if you prefer) in a double logarithmic plot (in matplotlib you accomplish this with
the function loglog). What will make the plot look the nicest is if you space your M values
logarithmically; the function kb_logspace will do this for you. Based on my lectures, you
should know how εG scales with M. Does it look like it follows the theory?
Ok, but we know we can do better. In the next few parts of the problem, rather than measuring
the absolute error, you will measure the percent error for a few different integration schemes. If you
have a true value vt and an estimated value ve, the percent error between your estimated and true
values is defined as
εp = 100 |vt −ve|
|vt| (3)
and in what follows, your “true” value is what your analytical solution gives you and the “estimated”
value is what the numerical integration produces.
(i) Write  another  Python  function  that  uses  a  second-order  Runge-Kutta  scheme  to  integrate 
Eqn. 1.
(j) Now integrate Eqn. 1 with both your RK and Euler integrators, out to T = 4, using a stepsize 
(∆t) of 0.25. Measure the percent error in N(T ) for both methods. What do you find?
You should have seen a substantial difference in percent error between the two methods. Finally,
we can try out an implicit integrator.
(k) Write a third and final Python function that integrates Eqn. 1 using the implicit Euler method
I discussed in class. For a stepsize of 0.25, what’s the percent error for the implicit Euler
method?
(l) Finally, as I remarked in class, one of the main benefits of implicit methods isn’t error rate, it
is stability at large step sizes. Integrate (one last time!) using both regular and implicit Euler
with a ∆t = 4, i. e. attempt to take a single step to the end. What are your percent errors?
And there you have it. Only use explicit Euler if you absolutely have to. Higher-order Runge-
Kutta methods are a best “first try” integrator in most cases. If you are having stability problems
(getting wacko results), switching to an implicit (or other stiff) method is your best bet