
1

Automatic Zoom
Numerical Optimization and Maximum Likelihood
As I mentioned in a previous assignment, there just aren’t that many data fitting problems that
you can do “by hand.” Most of them rely on numerical optimization, so in this exercise, you are
going to fit a distribution to some real data, setting the problem up using maximum likelihood and
then solving it via numerically minimizing the negative log likelihood.
The first thing you will consider is DNA fragment sizes. There are enzymes called restriction
enzymes, which are enzymes that cut DNA at specific sequences. The particular enzyme we will
consider for this problem is called BglI, and its cut site looks like
5′···GCCNNNN|NGGC ···3′
3′···CGGN|NNNNCCG ···5′
where the vertical line indicates where the cut is made, and “N” represents any nucleotide (A,C,G,
or T). BglI is a so-called “sticky-end” cutter because it leaves little overhangs in the two cut strands
(the vertical lines aren’t in the same place in the two strands). Genomes have many different
restriction sites (each having a different recognition sequence), and usually have many copies of
a given enyzme’s cut site as well. Random cutting (where we just break up a genome at a given
restriction site, yielding a bunch of different length fragments) is still used today when certain
kinds of sequencing are done — particularly shotgun sequencing, which is the primary way we
obtain microbiome sequences.
In this problem, you will start by doing some analysis and model fitting to the distribution of
DNA sequence lengths produced by cutting the E. coli genome using BglI. You’ll finish by fitting
the same basic model to a completely different data set!
(a) Start  by  reading  in  the  contents  of  BglI-fragments.fasta.  This  file  contains  all  the  DNA 
sequence fragments produced by cutting the E. coli  genome at every BglI cut site.  Fragments 
are stored as one per line.  You should compute the length of each fragment and store it in a 
list or array.
(b) To  plot  the  fragment  length  distribution,  we  will  do  a  bit  of  binning.  The  reason  for  this  is 
that  there  are  lots  of  sequences  that  differ  by  only  a  base  pair,  so  if  you  plot  the  raw  count 
data  (counts  vs.  length)  it  will  be  really  noisy.  I’ve  provided  a  python  function  bin_data() 
for you that will create binned counts — binning essentially treats nearby samples (sequences 
close  in  length)  as  one  entity  and  adds  their  counts  together.  Run  this  on  your  count  data, 
and  plot  (just  a  dot  plot  is  fine)  the  resulting  empirical  probability  distribution  of  fragment 
lengths,  with  density  on  the  y-axis  and  bin  centers  (length  values)  on  the  x-axis.  You  will 
probably want to experiment a bit with nbins to get a nice looking plot.  (Too few bins and 
you won’t see much detail, too many and your distribution will look really noisy.)
(c) If we assume the sites are randomly distributed in the genome  the  simplest  model  for  the 
length  data  is  an  exponential  distribution,  in which the probability of seeing a fragment of 
length l  Is
P(l|μ) = 1
μe−l/μ
where μ is a parameter we determine from the data. Write down the likelihood function
for observing a set of independent lengths {li} each distributed exponentially. Compute the
negative log likelihood and minimize it to find the maximum likelihood estimate for μ (Hint:
This calculation is pretty similar to what I did with the Poisson distribution in class.)
(d) Now plot the length data again, with your fitted exponential distribution on top of it. Evaluate
the exponential distribution at many different points to get a smooth curve (numpy.linspace
will be really helpful for this). Does it look like a good fit?
You probably got a pretty good match to the length data with an exponential distribution, but
other models are possible. One weird thing about the exponential distribution is that there is a
nonzero probability for l = 0, which makes absolutely no sense in this context. For this reason,
some people prefer a gamma distribution over an exponential one for problems like this, in which
you will never observe any zeros in your dataset. The gammma probability density is
P(l|α,β) = βα
Γ(α) lα−1e−βl
Here, Γ(α) is the Gamma function. We have to fit the two parameter gamma model numerically.
(e) We will start by setting up the model. Write down the negative log likelihood for a set of
independent length observations {li} which are each gamma distributed.
(f) We are going to do gradient descent, so we need a gradient. Compute the gradient of the
negative log likelihood. (Hint: This will be a two-component vector since you need a derivative
with respect to α and one with respect to β). You might be worried because you have a term
that looks like Γ′(α)
Γ(α)
and you don’t know what to do with it. Fear not, because scipy.special.digamma is exactly
this function! So when you need to evaluate it, you will be able to.
(g) Before moving on, there is a trick we can use to make the fitting easier. Solve the ∂l/∂β 
equation for βˆ and plug this into the ∂l/∂α equation. This reduces the minimization to a one-dimensional problem in which all we have to do is find the best α, and then plug in to find β. 
Going forward the derivative will be one-dimensional. Show the expression that will determine 
optimal α and β. 
(h) Write  a  steepest  descent  algorithm  for  fitting  the  parameters  in  the  gamma  function  to  the 
length data.  Just use a simple, fixed learning rate to start.  You should stop your minimization 
when either the parameters change by only a small amount from one iteration to the next, or 
when the magnitude of the gradient is small (these are the same condition, so whichever you 
find  easiset  to  code  is  fine).  Since  there  may  be  noisy  jumps  in  your  minimization  (because 
you  aren’t  bracketing  the  minimum),  make  sure  you  keep  track  of  the  parameter  set  that 
gives you the smallest negative log likelihood throughout the run.  If you want to check your 
steepest descent function before trying to fit the gamma, fit the exponential parameter above, 
since you know what the answer should  be.  If you get pretty close to the  right μ,  things are 
probably working.
